[SOUND EFFECT]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The most intense
emotion I've ever felt was
my mother's hatred
for my father,
and I'm exactly like him.
>> Oh.
>> I wanted to be in special
forces from the first time I
knew that the unit existed.
I love jumping out
of the airplanes.
>> Oh, my God.
You couldn't pay me a
million dollars to jump out.
And you knew Don Miguel Ruiz?
>> First four
lessons he taught--
lose self-importance,
erase personal history,
use death as an advisor,
accept responsibility
for your own acts.
And any time that I felt crappy,
I figured out which one of them
I was violating
and quit violating.
>> Then your wives started
entering into the story, right?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> There was Sidney,
and there was Vadna.
>> Juanita, Kat--
>> Myrna.
>> And Myrna.
I had written a bunch
of stuff about Vietnam,
and I couldn't sell it anywhere.
But I heard some
wacko in Boulder
had started a trade journal for
mercenaries, so I called him
and he drove 500 miles.
And then four years
later, I got a card,
"We have accepted your story."
And I--
>> Your story?
>> My viewpoint on the war
at that point was highly
unpopular.
I'd made my move, and
it changed my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
This is going to be
an interesting conversation.
I'm going to be talking with
Jim Morris, author of Dreaming
Circus and a man
who has struggled
to find a spiritual side in the
place of the world of women.
It hasn't been easy,
but it was helped
when he began developing his
spiritual side with Don Miguel
Ruiz and Carlos Castaneda
to understand war and women.
And you've done plenty of both.
>>JIM MORRIS: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: [CHUCKLES]
Your book came to us
and, Dreaming Circus,
and of course, no one--
you don't know what it's
about till you get into it
and start reading it.
But one thing I
found interesting
is you're kind of a--
though in your
book, like you say,
when you started
this journey, you
had the spiritual
development of a turnip.
>>MORRIS: Exactly.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
And-- but you did go on
to do some amazing things and
have some amazing experiences.
>>MORRIS: I did.
>>REGINA: And you
developed yourself.
And the reason I wanted to
talk to you about all this
is because of this
first part of the story.
And we'll get to
that as you tell it.
So how about if we dive in?
>>MORRIS: Without a doubt.
>>REGINA: First of all, your
book is called Dreaming Circus,
and your life reads like
a three-ring circus.
So why did you title
it Dreaming Circus?
>>MORRIS: Well, my
friend, Lee McCormick,
was writing a book about
his Toltec experiences.
And I said, "So what are
you going to call it, Lee?"
And he said, "Eagle
and Serpent."
But I don't hear very well.
And I heard The Dreaming Circus.
And I said, "Did you say
The Dreaming Circus?"
And he said, "No,
Eagle and Serpent."
And I said, "OK.
Eagle and Serpent is yours.
Dreaming Circus is mine."
>>REGINA: OK, there you go.
So we have it.
And although you did
have a lucid dream
in there in the
book, but it's really
about something, a much
wider story about the eagle
and the serpent, really?
>>MORRIS: Well, Don Miguel
says that our whole lives
are a dream.
>>REGINA: Right.
And you knew Don Miguel Ruiz.
>>MORRIS: I met him
when I interviewed him
for the San Diego Reader.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MORRIS: And I was
on the way there.
I was, OK, is this
guy for realist?
You know, the Shaman--
what is this about?
And I looked in his
eyes, and I was in.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah, wonderful man.
He played an important role
in my life as well, long ago,
when he first wrote
The Four Agreements.
So let's get into
this notion of you.
We're going to just talk
about your life story here,
because there is the
point here, to me,
is that you were raised in
an age when boys still had
to go out and prove
themselves in the world, where
you were out of the house.
And including in
my generation, you
had to be out of
the house at 18.
There was no lollygagging.
You either got a job, got
married, or went to school.
>>MORRIS: Well, I was
out of the house at 12.
But--
>>REGINA: OK.
Even more so.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
And part of your
journey was you were
one of the first wave of boys.
You're 83 now, right?
You look great.
You were one of the first wave
of boys that was raised really
by a solo parent, by a woman.
>>MORRIS: That's true.
>>REGINA: Which wasn't common.
Even when I was raised,
people had two parents.
>>MORRIS: Well, I've thought
a lot about that, too.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And the way you describe
it is, you were raised
as the first metrosexual.
So let's talk about
your experience
as a boy being raised
by only a woman, which
wasn't natural in the day,
who didn't understand men
very well.
>>MORRIS: Well, first of
all, it was World War II.
It started when I was four.
One of my earliest experiences
is Roosevelt's Pearl Harbor
speech.
And what I remember about
it is it's the only time
I've ever seen my mother scared.
And she was a widow
18 months later.
But we moved around a lot.
She was a government
secretary in DC.
When the war started,
she got to open up
an office for the
Petroleum administration
for War in Tulsa.
So we moved to Tulsa,
lived with other people.
They didn't really
want us there.
And that was my first four
or five years of school
was living with different
people every year who really
didn't much want us there.
And so that was not great.
>>REGINA: Oh, right.
Well, and you said your
mom was terrifying to you.
You were afraid of your mother.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
I was-- well, not
intermittently.
But she just wanted me to be--
she did not want me
to be like my dad.
I have to say that the most
intense emotion I've ever felt
was my mother's
hatred for my father,
and I'm exactly like him.
>>REGINA: Oh.
OK.
>>MORRIS: But she was
oblivious to that.
She made me into somebody
else in her mind.
>>REGINA: Isn't
that interesting?
So she was trying
to raise you to be
the perfect little gentleman.
You talk about this in
terms of the film characters
you were interested
in, the actors.
Your mom had a lifelong
thing for Van Johnson,
the golden-haired gentleman
that appeared in many,
many films of her day where--
You liked David Niven, who was
a gentleman and an officer.
You liked that whole story.
>>MORRIS: Well, he went to--
he was a Sandhurst grad.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MORRIS: He was a major in
the commandos in World War II.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MORRIS: His batman
was Peter Ustinov.
>>REGINA: I didn't know that.
Interesting.
[LAUGHTER]
So you had an
intrigue with this.
So there was something in
you that was, as a young man,
really trying to find your edge.
And so this is the part
that's interesting to me
in contemporary time.
Well, now.
And that is you have, now,
one or two generations of boys
who've been raised by women.
It's a common phenomena.
So here, you have
boys that still
have the same levels
of testosterone
in their bodies going
through puberty.
They still have this need
to press against something
and rebel and sharpen
edges, but there's nothing
to sharpen them against now.
>>MORRIS: Well, it
depends on the mom.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK, interesting.
Go ahead with that one.
>>MORRIS: Well, my mother was--
she was quite beautiful,
and she was a lady.
But I have a friend, in
fact, a friend who lives here
in Boulder that I'm probably
going to have dinner
with tomorrow night.
And he said, when
I went through OCS,
he said those TAC officers had
guys with tears running down
their cheeks, and
those TAC officers
were amateurs
compared to my mother.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So your mother--
so you were raised by a
powerful and strong woman.
>>MORRIS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Right?
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so you--
but she was raising
you to be something
that you weren't because you
were, in fact, shaping up
to be more like your
dad than anything.
>>MORRIS: Well, I
look more like him.
I act like him.
Well, I had his
example to avoid.
So I'm not a lot like--
I'm like my dad in all
the ways that worked.
He was my first mystic.
He's practiced yoga from
the age of about 10 on.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>MORRIS: He sent $0.15 to
a magazine and got a manual
and started following
that manual.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And doing-- and so he had a
lifelong practice of yoga?
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: What was it your
mom hated so much about him?
>>MORRIS: He sued her
for divorce the same week
her mother died.
>>REGINA: Oh, that
was insensitive.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
Well, he didn't know.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: But I don't think
she took that into account.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Oh, OK.
>>MORRIS: And I've never been
able to get clear on this.
I know she lost a girl after me,
and I think they had a fight.
And well, as I said
in the book, they
both had the reckless
courage of kamikazes.
And so I'm glad I wasn't
there for that fight.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
OK.
So you got out young.
And then you decided to-- you
went to military school, right?
So let's talk about
that a little bit.
Did you get to start
feeling your masculinity
when you went to military school
or was that stomped out of you?
>>MORRIS: OK.
I'd been a loner, and I was
still pretty much a loner.
But by the end of the first
day in military school,
I had three more
friends than I'd ever
had before, which was three,
which was my roommates.
And another thing that happened
is that kid in the eighth grade
decided he was going to haze me.
And entirely more by
accident than design,
I did the perfect aikido move
and sent him to the hospital.
So nobody messed with me for the
two years I was in that school.
>>REGINA: And it
went on like that.
So by the time you end up
going into the military,
you wanted to see some action.
You didn't want
to go to Germany.
In the day, you could
get sent over to Germany
on a base or a desk job that
was pretty common in the time.
You wanted to see some
action and we had the--
>>MORRIS: Well, I wanted
to be in special forces.
I wanted to be in special
forces from the first time
I knew that the unit existed.
>>REGINA: So that happened?
You did, and you
ended up being chosen,
and you ended up going
to parachuting school?
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right.
So let's talk about
that for a minute
because you said
graduation from that,
doing that was the most
proud moment of your life up
to that point.
>>MORRIS: Well, before that,
I was a loner and nerd.
Mama's boy.
And once I had those wings, I
was just a whole new category
of personnel.
And besides, I loved jumping
out of the airplanes.
>>REGINA: Oh, my God.
I can't even-- you can't pay me
a million dollars to jump out.
And it's just the thrill,
the exhilaration of it?
>>MORRIS: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And I just
never understood
why people actually trusted
those chutes would open.
>>MORRIS: Well, I
knew the riggers.
And oh, God.
We don't have time for me
to go off into stories,
but they keep
popping into my head.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK.
So you did it.
You lived through it.
All right.
So then you end up
going to Vietnam.
And it's interesting because
you stated that those first six
months in Vietnam were the
happiest years of your life
and months of your life.
Now, a lot of people
that went to Vietnam
say those were the worst
years of their life.
>>MORRIS: I've heard
people say that.
>>REGINA: So what is it about
going into this weird war
of guerrilla warfare?
>>MORRIS: OK.
It took me a long
time to figure it out.
But let's jump
back to Castaneda.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>MORRIS: The first four lessons
he taught, at least to me,
were lose self-importance,
erase personal history,
use death as an advisor,
accept responsibility
for your own acts.
And I didn't have
a personal history.
I didn't have any
self-importance.
>>REGINA: Because you
were in a foreign land,
and you weren't important there.
Right.
>>MORRIS: And I used death
as an advisor because, hey.
And I had to accept
responsibility for my own acts
because I was usually in charge.
So and he's right.
That's the formula
for happiness.
You follow those rules,
those four rules.
>>REGINA: Say them again
for anybody listening.
>>MORRIS: Lose self-importance,
erase personal history,
use death as an advisor,
accept responsibility
for your own acts.
When I learned them, I made
an acronym out of them--
LEDA.
And any time that I felt
crappy, I ran through that list
and figured out
which one of them
I was violating and
quit violating it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Well, now, we're
talking off camera
and I was telling you, because
I used to be on those flights
with the soldiers going
over and coming back.
And the soldiers
coming back, I didn't
understand it, the psychology.
Going over, there was this
jubilation and jockeying around
and jokey.
>>MORRIS: Adrenaline was up.
>>REGINA: Your
adrenaline was up.
Yay, we're going to go
to war and all that.
Coming home, it was
like being in a hearse.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: There was no energy.
These were flat-faced people.
I would see young girls, Thai
girls or Vietnamese girls,
with their babies from the
man, the American soldiers,
who were going to
go on to become
rejects of their own
family and society.
And I saw a whole
different spectrum.
It looked horrible, honestly.
But you weren't even part
of the regular infantry.
>>MORRIS: No.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: We used to
call them The Americans.
>>REGINA: Really?
So why was your experience
so different over there?
Because you have some
unique experience--
>>MORRIS: Because my
troops were all natives
of one sort or another.
I mean, there were 12
Americans there in a team.
And when we went out on
patrol, they were usually
five Americans with 100 guys.
And--
>>REGINA: And these were the
locals, yeah, fighting on,
quote, "you're fighting
on their side."
>>MORRIS: Right.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: And I knew that I was
making a positive contribution
to those people's lives.
>>REGINA: Well,
didn't it turn out--
I mean, I'm going to bring
a couple-- one of these--
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
It turned out really bad.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
It turned out bad.
It wasn't exactly
what you thought.
And you started realizing--
the Russians came
in on one side.
Well, the Soviets
came in on one side,
we came in on the other side.
And the fact was some
of these were thousands
of year-old tribal wars
that were actually going on
of which you guys had no idea.
>>MORRIS: The tribe I
worked with, the Jarai,
had been fighting the tribe
that the VC controlled
for about 900 years.
>>REGINA: And you
guys hadn't a clue?
Right?
>>MORRIS: Yeah, we--
[CHUCKLES]
>>REGINA: Soviets and
Americans, really?
>>MORRIS: Well, we
picked it up fast.
We had to.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so here you
are in a situation.
You're trying to live by
Castaneda's, you know.
>>MORRIS: Well, not then.
>>REGINA: You weren't there yet.
You were--
>>MORRIS: No, that was later.
>>REGINA: Oh, that was later.
OK.
So you're just jacked up,
and you're in special forces
and you love what you're
doing and so forth.
But the fact was there
were incredible atrocities
and decisions that
had to be made.
You talked about in your
book, one situation,
where a four-year-old
has a grenade,
and you have to
decide what to do.
>>MORRIS: Well, I just met--
that wasn't me.
I met this guy in a bar,
and he looked pretty glum.
And I said, "What's with you?"
And he said, "I killed a
four-year-old boy yesterday."
And I said, "Well,
that's pretty rough."
And he said, "Kid
had a grenade."
And I could relate to that
because we had accidentally
killed a teenager, I
guess, he was of the NAR.
>>REGINA: I remember you talking
about that and that affect--
>>MORRIS: I couldn't
get that kid out
of my dreams for a decade.
>>REGINA: Because war all seems
so clinical and mechanical,
until something
like that happens,
when some young person's
life is cut short.
>>MORRIS: I think it seems
clinical and mechanical
from the outside.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
watching it on TV.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Right.
So after that event,
the interesting thing
is you have a lot
of living in here.
But you went back
and tried to work
with the tribe and some
of the people in the tribe
later in life.
>>MORRIS: Well--
>>REGINA: Can you
talk about that a bit?
>>MORRIS: In several ways.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: Well, OK.
My first interpreter,
Pardo, or Bardo
is what the
Americans called him.
But anyway, he had become a
major in the Cambodian army,
and they sent him to
school at Fort Benning.
So I was out.
I was retired.
But I went to visit him,
and he said, "I tell you,
Morris, after this
war is over, I
go back lead my people
against the Vietnamese.
How do you think
I should do this?"
I said, "Well, I'll
do an area study,
and I'll tell you what
I think you should do."
And what I decided was that he
just didn't have the basics.
He didn't have the things
that you need to do that.
And I went to tell him
that, and he said, "Well,
that's too bad because I'm
going to do it anyway."
And did you see
the killing fields?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MORRIS: You know the thing
when the French embassy threw
the Cambodians out?
Because he and his family
were among those people.
>>REGINA: OK.
All right.
So continue on how you
went back and interfaced
with these people later on.
>>MORRIS: Well, I
went back and I had
a Lord Jim fantasy go in there.
And it was just garbage
because those guys knew more
about running raids and ambushes
than I did at that point.
What they needed was
international backing.
So I came home, and the
idea was to round up--
they said-- they were
fans of Teddy Kennedy.
He had made a speech to
the UN that impressed them.
So I wrote him, and
they just blew me off.
And I got stoned
and stayed stoned
for about the next decade.
And then-- but all that
stuff that I picked up there,
I was able to use in a refugee
project several years later.
And we got 200 people.
The first 200 Montagnards,
well, actually, there
may be a dozen here before that.
But we got the first
200 Montagnards
out of a refugee
camp in Thailand
and into the United States.
And then this wild and
crazy correspondent
named Nate Thayer
found another 800
that were in the
woods in Cambodia.
And we had run the State
Department through.
So many changes getting
this first 200 over
that they just, yeah,
bring them home.
We're not going to
fight that one, huh.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And a lot of them
immigrated to California.
>>MORRIS: Oh, that's true.
>>REGINA: A lot of people.
Yeah.
>>MORRIS: That's true.
But most of them went to--
well, I was
instrumental in getting
resettled in North Carolina.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Yeah.
>>MORRIS: Well, I wanted--
they'd work for special forces.
Some of the guys had,
most of the guys had.
And that's where SF is located.
So I knew they'd have friends.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MORRIS: And my
friend, Don Scott,
who was the main guy
in that refugee thing,
Don wanted to take
them to Massachusetts,
which was where he was from.
And I said, "No.
They'll freeze to death there,
and they won't know anybody."
So we sent them to Fayetteville,
mostly Fayetteville.
I knew the ones in Greensboro.
And I'm still-- one of
the Montagnards married
a friend of mine,
Cindy McCurdy, who's
now Cindy [INAUDIBLE NAME].
Her husband, [INAUDIBLE NAME],,
is a friend of mine.
And I was-- he was
the first Montagnard
I was able to have a real
in-depth conversation
with because he'd learned
a lot more English than any
of the ones I knew there.
So he was telling me
about his experience
during the Tet Offensive.
>>REGINA: So it wasn't just
a tour of duty for you.
It wasn't just a tour of duty.
>>MORRIS: Oh, no.
>>REGINA: Your
three tours of duty.
>>MORRIS: It was a life.
>>REGINA: It was a life, and you
were integrated into that life.
And you cared about what
happened to the people
after that life.
>>MORRIS: Well, we
lived in a rattan shack,
and I would wake
up in the morning
and there'd be a lady in
the long house next door,
husking rice with a thing
that looked like a Louisville
Slugger.
It was a mortar and pestle.
And I would wake up to that--
kathunk, kathunk, kathunk,
this lady husking the rice.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I know.
And that's interesting
because it did teach you
about what a lot of people
didn't learn was necessarily
about different ways that
people contend with life
and how cultures are
structured and how
people have different needs.
And you chose to stay.
You chose to remain involved
with the people that you were,
over there--
>>MORRIS: I think
almost all of us have.
>>REGINA: In special forces.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Yeah, because we always
think of you as you
go and you shoot
them up and go home.
>>MORRIS: No.
There are non--
NGOs.
There are special forces guys
taking care of Montagnards
in the states.
>>REGINA: I love it.
I love that part of it.
>>MORRIS: Well, it's
happening again now.
I just made a contribution
to buy a prosthesis
for an Afghan interpreter.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
>>MORRIS: And he lost
his leg working for us.
>>REGINA: So it's interesting.
So special forces
guys stick together,
and you have these
experiences with the people,
with the local people,
the native people
of any land you're in.
>>MORRIS: Well, my two
best friends in Vietnam
were my interpreters,
because we could
talk more or less in depth.
And what happened to
them is not something
I would wish on anyone.
>>REGINA: Maybe we won't talk
about that right now because I
don't want to start crying.
>>MORRIS: Another
topic for another time.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I don't want to start crying.
So OK.
So the Vietnam time
has passed now.
And now you've come
back, and now you're
in California, right?
>>MORRIS: No, I came
home to Oklahoma.
>>REGINA: But when did
you go to California?
>>MORRIS: I went to California--
OK.
I went to Cali--
>>REGINA: Where are you from
in Oklahoma, by the way?
>>MORRIS: Well,
mostly Oklahoma City.
>>REGINA: Oklahoma City, OK.
>>MORRIS: But I went
to California in 1990.
I came there from New York.
I was an editor in
New York Publishing.
And then before that,
I was a correspondent
for Soldier of Fortune.
>>REGINA: Yes, I remember
that part, Soldier of Fortune.
So you started doing a
lot of drugs is the point.
>>MORRIS: When I
first got out, yeah.
>>REGINA: When you first got
out and that was pretty common.
I mean, the
Haight-Ashbury thing,
because I was very young, and
I watched soldiers coming home.
And I watched the streets
filling with homeless people
including a lot of vets.
>>MORRIS: I do have
to tell one story.
>>REGINA: Sure, tell us.
>>MORRIS: When I was on my way
back to Vietnam the last time,
I had a three-day layover
at Travis Air Force Base.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>MORRIS: And I'd been--
the hippie thing was--
>>REGINA: Going?
>>MORRIS: You're right.
And I said, well, this
is pretty interesting.
So I'll take a look at that.
And I thought, OK.
If I go down there in
civvies with this haircut,
they'll just think I'm an idiot.
So I went-- I put on the suit--
jump boots, green beret,
wings, combat infantry,
all that stuff.
And I went down there.
>>REGINA: Wait, to where?
To Haight-Ashbury?
>>MORRIS: Haight-Ashbury.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Dressed as, oh.
>>MORRIS: Dressed like that.
>>REGINA: A green beret.
>>MORRIS: And it was
like I was just--
they gave me a wide berth.
And I checked into
a silversmith shop,
and a kid came in there in a
wheelchair looking for work.
And he said, "Are you
what you look like?"
And I said, "Yeah."
And he said, "What
are you doing here?"
>>REGINA: What are
you doing here?
Yeah, exactly.
>>MORRIS: Yeah, yeah.
And so then he said, "Well,
I'll show you around."
Well, when I was with him in a
wheelchair, all of that menace
was gone.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MORRIS: And we wound
up making friends
with a guy who
owned a head shop.
We went up to his
apartment that afternoon.
He turned me on to weed
for the first time.
He said, "I'm going
to do some acid.
Do you mind?"
I said, "No.
It's your apartment."
So he-- it was the
Summer of Love, 1967.
He did some sugar cube acid.
And we were listening-- it's
the first time he'd ever
heard The Doors.
We were playing The
Doors' first album.
And he said, "Listen to that."
He was pretty high by this time.
He said, "Listen, that's the
greatest Afro-Cuban rhythm."
And I said, "It's not
an Afro-Cuban rhythm.
It's some band called The Doors.
They're doing a song
called The End."
And he said, "Not
the record, man.
The refrigerator motor.
Listen to it."
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] All right.
So welcome to Haight-Ashbury.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yep, yep.
OK.
So thank you for that story.
But the point is that once
you connected with that world,
you were--
you were kind of--
>>MORRIS: I was in.
>>REGINA: You were all in.
Anything you did,
you were all in.
So now, you went from
this lifestyle, discipline
and whatnot as a
Green Beret, to drugs.
>>MORRIS: Well, let's give
Ken Kesey credit for that.
>>REGINA: OK.
Ken Kesey, absolutely.
Yeah.
>>MORRIS: And I read The
Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.
And I actually knew
the Whole Earth Catalog
guy, Stewart Brand.
He and I have been lieutenants
together at Fort Dix.
>>REGINA: OK.
So what was--
I mean, you would,
in a cliche sense,
I would say, well, after
the atrocities of war
and all, you might want to
turn to acid and other drugs
to maybe forget about
it or drown yourself.
But that's not necessarily
what you were doing.
>>MORRIS: Well, I was
just looking for something
to belong to.
And with all that moving
around as a child,
the military was
something to belong to.
I did not want to belong
to corporate America,
but I was really interested
in the music, for one thing.
And it felt like home.
>>REGINA: And where
was that again?
>>MORRIS: In Norman, Oklahoma.
>>REGINA: In Norman, Oklahoma.
OK.
Which is a university town.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
Not at all like the
rest of the state.
>>REGINA: No, it's not.
Not at all.
And so then you have
your wives started
entering into the story, right?
>>MORRIS: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
So this was something.
Now, we're going back to
stuff with mom and everything,
and you're drawing these
women into your life.
And I haven't written
down, but you'll need to--
before we get to the Don
Miguel Ruiz part, let's see.
One of them was named--
there was Sidney, and there
was Vadna, and there was--
>>MORRIS: Juanita, Cindy--
>>REGINA: Juanita.
I missed her.
>>MORRIS: Vadna, Cat--
>>REGINA: Myrna.
>>MORRIS: And Myrna.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So what was this journey?
So you were on all these drugs.
In fact, you were talking
about your wedding.
I have written down here.
Strawberry acid was served
at your wedding with Cindy.
I mean, you were all in.
>>MORRIS: OK I was still--
>>REGINA: Married by a witch.
>>MORRIS: I was still living
at home with my first wife.
The first time I ever tripped.
Well, she didn't-- she was
not delighted by this turn
of events, and other things
just dissolved the marriage.
And then I met Cindy,
and we went to--
OK, we were both fifth
wheels going to a concert.
So we were thrown together.
And in the concert,
she went to sleep
with her head on my shoulder.
And then when I took her home,
I kissed her and that was it.
I was a goner.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I remember you telling
me she was a pretty one.
But you said that Cindy--
so you got married by a witch,
and they served strawberry acid
and everything.
But you said something about
Cindy that was interesting.
You said in your
relationship with her,
you were able to see
life differently.
You were able to see--
>>MORRIS: Well, she's an artist.
She taught me to see textures.
She taught me to--
I mean, I had lived
in a geometric--
>>REGINA: World of rock.
>>MORRIS: Yeah, yeah.
And she was fascinated
with moss and bark and all
of those kinds of
things, and she
taught me to just see the
world in a whole new way.
And well, she's still doing it.
We're still friends,
close friends.
>>REGINA: So with her,
she opened you up,
like you said, from
this stone-solid world
into the more subtle and
colorful aspect of life.
So you were young.
That dissolved, right?
>>MORRIS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so tell us what happens from
there and then where the Don
Miguel Ruz part
starts coming in.
And Myrna was a big part.
We'll talk about her, too.
>>MORRIS: Well, I had to--
yeah, Myrna's-- well worth
[LAUGHS] the conversation.
But well, what happened
after that was, first of all,
I got a job doing a tech
writing job for the Post Office
Department.
So I had six months to
convert one of their manuals
into programmed instruction,
and I finished one third of it
by noon the first day.
So I thought, [SIGHS]
I've got to slow down.
But I've got to look
like I'm working.
Well, anybody reading
a hardback book
with the dust jacket laid aside
looks like they're working.
And I saw A Separate Reality
in a bookstore window.
So I got that, and I read it.
And I thought, oh,
this is a whole new way
of looking at the world.
This is really interesting.
So then I got Journey to Ixtlan,
and then I got Tales of Power.
And then while I was supposed
to be there working on the--
>>REGINA: Manual.
>>MORRIS: --on the manual,
I edited all the teaching
parts of the first
four Castaneda books
into a sorcerer's manual.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
>>MORRIS: And so I
really learned that stuff
when I was doing that.
And then I started
to practice it.
But I still didn't--
I mean, I was like--
20 years before, I never
met anybody else that
had the slightest interest.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I was going to say you
were way ahead of your time
in doing this.
>>MORRIS: Well, the stuff
was hot immediately.
I mean, Castaneda's
work were best sellers,
instant bestsellers.
So there were all
kinds of people
who were interested in it,
but I didn't know any of them.
>>REGINA: In Norman, Oklahoma.
>>MORRIS: In, well, in--
yeah.
There may have been
some in Norman,
but I just didn't
bump into them.
What my friends
were into as well,
my best friend at that time,
was the lead guitar player
in a mediocre rock
and roll band.
And so that's what--
we were into the music,
we were into that life.
But then they all graduated.
I was in grad school, but they
all graduated and went away.
And I was, well, I
got married again.
But I'd rather not even
talk about that one.
>>REGINA: Yeah, we
passed over that one.
>>MORRIS: But then I
got the tech writing job
and started learning
the Castaneda stuff.
And I started trying
to lucid dream,
and I started going on vision
quests and stuff like that.
And it worked to a large degree.
>>REGINA: When
you say it worked,
what do you mean it worked?
>>MORRIS: Well,
when I started all
that, I was a writer who hadn't
sold anything for six years.
And I couldn't get arrested,
and I was depressed.
And I was--
I mean, I couldn't get
arrested by a publisher.
And not too long after
that, I sold another book
and got a better job.
And then I got a better job, and
I had written a bunch of stuff
about Vietnam.
And I couldn't sell it anywhere.
But I heard some
wacko in Boulder
had started a trade
journal for mercenaries.
So I called him, and
he drove 500 miles
out of his way to pick up
my box of stuff from which I
had no copies.
Took it back to
Boulder, lost it.
And then four years
later, I got a card,
"We have accepted your story."
And I thought, which story?
>>REGINA: Which story?
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
Well, their new editor
had found my box,
and they bought all of it
before they were through.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>MORRIS: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And you're a
very engaging writer.
>>MORRIS: Thank you.
>>REGINA: It's just that nothing
was moving, until you started
doing some of these practices.
>>MORRIS: My
viewpoint on the war
at that point was highly
unpopular, except with wackos
in Boulder.
>>REGINA: So tell us what
your viewpoint had become
and what you were documenting.
>>MORRIS: Well, I just told
war stories, combat tales.
And you couldn't sell a
story unless it was subtitled
Mea Culpa at that point.
And I didn't subtitle
mine Mea Culpa just--
here we were.
This is what happened.
>>REGINA: So you started
using some of these principles
to work with through
rituals and so forth.
And now, were you
still augmenting
this with hallucinogenics
and so forth at this time?
>>MORRIS: Say again?
>>REGINA: Were you
augmenting your work
with hallucinogenics and
drugs still or were you
beyond that at this time?
>>MORRIS: Three years after
I started with psychedelics,
I had an insight.
>>REGINA: What was that?
>>MORRIS: Well, when I started
doing this, I was too uptight,
and I was getting way too loose.
>>REGINA: OK.
Unwound.
>>MORRIS: So I
just took my stash
and flushed it down the toilet.
And I've had very little contact
with those things since then.
>>REGINA: What did it serve
to show you at the time?
>>MORRIS: OK.
I'm going to use a phrase from
Castaneda about power plants.
"They will awaken you from
the torpor of your normal way
of thinking."
And that's what they do.
They shake you up.
They let you out of the box
you're in into a bigger room,
but they won't take you outside.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah, very well put.
OK.
So let's talk about
what happened there,
because ultimately, you say--
here, I wrote this down.
You say and I think this was
with Vadna, but I'm not sure.
One of them.
You said you were living like
a powerless little husband.
And so you used to barge around
the house acting like an a-hole
just to feel like
you had some power.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
And well, I did that.
I've done that several times.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: And so eventually--
>>REGINA: But in fact, you were
feeling powerless as a man.
>>MORRIS: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: And why was that?
You felt totally purposeful
when you were in the war.
>>MORRIS: I relate it back
to my childhood when--
that was what my relationship
with my mom was like.
We were like-- it was
a male and a female,
and the female
had all the power.
And what-- the only way
I could assert myself
in that relationship was
by being manipulative.
And I learned all that.
>>REGINA: Well, that's
interesting because, now,
again, coming back
to these times,
girls are graduating from
college in greater numbers.
They're getting
a lot of the jobs
that more at the head of the
corporations than ever before.
And a lot more men,
white men, in particular,
feel like they're being
more marginalized.
In fact, I have this fellow
that's a friend of mine.
He was a friend of my
son's for many, many years
who went into study.
He went into training to become
a policeman, a cop, right?
And his trainer told
him right off the bat,
"I'm going to tell you
right now, son, you're male
and you're white.
No one's going to take you."
Right?
And no one took him,
but the other people
in his class that were
female, and people
from different ethnic
backgrounds were placed.
He was not placed.
And now, looking
at this whole thing
of feeling disempowered and
white males, in particular,
feeling disempowered
and left behind.
>>MORRIS: I read about that.
My take on it is if you
need to dominate a woman
to feel like a man, you don't
understand men or women.
>>REGINA: That is very true.
That's very true.
So for you,
yourself, how did you
learn to find your own
power when you yourself felt
dominated and left
behind in your own life?
>>MORRIS: Through 10
years of Toltec training.
>>REGINA: OK, let's
talk about that.
Maybe this is the key--
>>MORRIS: Well, OK.
>>REGINA: --in
this conversation.
>>MORRIS: This is--
OK.
Don Miguel's method
with his students,
and this is my
take on his method.
He might say it's entirely
something different,
but he just peels off the
layers of your discontent
until you finally get down
to your authentic self.
And the layers of my
discontent were resentment
of being a powerless male.
And of course, I
didn't understand
any of this at that time.
It was all just me
blundering around.
But it was through this
training that I got to learn it,
and that involved six
trips to Teotihaucan
and going through
that ceremony there,
which, that's what it's designed
to do-- to peel off the layers
and take you into
who you really are.
>>REGINA: So once you got down
to this stripped down powerless
boy, basically, how did
you begin rebuilding?
Because there's something-- some
of his practices he works with
is called--
I have them written down--
erasing, recapitulation,
stalking, and shielding.
>>MORRIS: OK.
One of the great Toltec teachers
is a woman named Gini Gentry.
And Gini was a friend of mine.
I liked her.
I'd been her student.
I'd been to Peru with her.
I'd done a bunch
of stuff with her.
But I went down for
one trip, and my clue
was that I was working
on the woman thing.
And all of a sudden everything
she did teed me off.
And finally, it ended.
And I confronted her in
a meeting in the evening.
And well, I confronted her.
And actually, it
was the first time
I'd ever done that
with a powerful woman.
I'd sniveled around and
manipulated and done
this and that, but it was
the first time I just ever
gotten somebody's
face and said, "No.
This is not right."
And as it happened, it was
about as right as it wasn't.
But nonetheless, I had made my
move, and it changed my life.
>>REGINA: How so?
>>MORRIS: Well, Myrna.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about Myrna now.
We've got a little bit.
Just a few minutes left.
Let's talk about Myrna.
Because this is really big.
>>MORRIS: Yeah, it's really big.
>>REGINA: To do a thing that
oftentimes men don't get around
until too late in life
and that's called care.
>>MORRIS: Well, this is pretty--
I mean, Myrna was
58 when I met her.
I was 53, somewhere like that.
Most beautiful
woman I'd ever seen.
Smartest person I've ever known.
Just amazing.
Just an amazing person.
She was the launch
officer on Pioneer 5.
That sucker is still out
there beaming data back.
And when she got
out of aerospace,
she became an art restorer.
And she worked on San Simeone.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>MORRIS: Well, my
favorite picture of Myrna
is on a platform around the
dome of the Griffith Park
observatory with
scaffolding all over it.
And there are 140 guys and
one woman on that scaffolding.
One of the guys is the
director of the observatory,
another one was the
architect on the project,
and all the rest
of them are working
for the woman, that was Myrna.
>>REGINA: Myrna.
[LAUGHS]
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
I mean, she was--
>>REGINA: She was
an amazing woman.
>>MORRIS: Oh, boy howdy.
We took up with each other.
And I think our first date was
to Whole Life Expo in Pasadena,
something like that.
>>REGINA: Now, mind
you-- by the way,
I just want to put in here.
You'd also had an
experience with the Ouija
board, some lucid dreaming, and
you were right on, by the way.
So you had an avid
open side of you,
very mystical side of
you developing dream
throughout this.
So let's go ahead--
>>MORRIS: Oh, yeah.
But I still have
this big glitch.
>>REGINA: But you
had the glitch.
>>MORRIS: And well, I still had
it when I took up with Myrna,
and we split up.
I mean, we were together
for a couple of years,
then we split up for six years.
And then we got back together.
And that's when I started
taking classes from Don Miguel.
And that's where
I went through--
And then by the time
Myrna really needed me,
I was ready to be needed.
>>REGINA: And this was a whole
reversal-- role reversal.
I mean, it's that role
you had never played,
that of the caregiver, really.
>>MORRIS: Well, I
had to take the lead.
She was-- what's the word?
She lost her marbles, basically.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
She had dementia.
>>MORRIS: Yeah.
She had dementia, and
it was very slow onset.
But OK, we used to
like to watch NCIS.
And I found myself explaining
the segment we just watched
while the commercials ran.
And I thought, "Why
am I doing that?"
And then I realized,
oh, she's not grasping.
And it progressed
and progressed.
And so I had more
and more to do.
And then she got her
paralysis and that was--
[SIGHS] that was hard.
That was hard.
But it's interesting because
she lost most of her looks,
but nothing happened
to the love we had.
Nothing happened to that.
And I remember when--
>>REGINA: That's a real soul
connection you had, finally.
Yeah, real soul connection.
>>MORRIS: And when I started
going to the Toltec training,
she was against it at first.
And then after about
almost a year, she said,
"Whatever you're
doing, keep it up."
>>REGINA: Very good.
So this taught you humility.
It taught you service.
It taught you care,
really deep care.
>>MORRIS: Well, I just laid
all that resentment aside.
That was the big move.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, so that had to
have been a huge turning
point in your own life.
>>MORRIS: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And it's
interesting because--
I've noticed this.
I'm an observer, and I watch,
even generationally, people.
And one thing I
noticed with men--
I'd see this in my
parents' generation,
and my grandparents'
generation not quite
as much, but definitely
my dad's generation.
And that was, as
the men got older
and they got past all the
testosterone-driven years
and past all of the singularity
and focus and everything,
that they started becoming
more open to others
and the capacity
of care, wanting
to be around, say,
their grandkids,
maybe helping their wife out
around the house with stuff.
And it reminded
me of a film I saw
that was so beautiful about
the development of males
and females.
And it starts out looking
at the backside short,
looking at the backsides
of naked babies--
a boy and a girl baby--
though it's the same.
Right?
Little potbellies
and cute, chubby.
And then it showed them as
they came into the puberty,
and they started changing a bit.
Teenage years-- the men's
shoulders are widening,
the girl has a small waist.
And it goes through life
all the way into, I think,
it was like their 80s or so.
And at the back, their back
both looking like a baby.
A little bit pear shaped,
scrawny little legs,
and they look the same from
behind, the men and the women.
We all go back where
we started in the end.
>>MORRIS: I learned a
lot from my stepfather,
and my mother remarried again.
I was the best man.
>>REGINA: Oh.
>>MORRIS: And I was 15, but I
went away to military school.
And then I went away to college.
So I wasn't around much.
But I learned a lot
from Bill Morris,
who is a really smart guy.
And he said to me
one time, he said,
"I will do anything to
make this marriage work."
>>REGINA: There you go.
>>MORRIS: [CHUCKLES]
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And that is going to
ultimately come down
to setting grievances aside,
resentments aside, and care.
>>MORRIS: Well, my
mother wasn't easy,
and Bill was not milquetoast.
He didn't-- that's
no part of Bill.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] You
said his name was Morris.
So you took your
step dad's name?
>>MORRIS: I took my
step dad's name, yeah.
There's a story there, too,
but I'm not going to tell it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK.
So we're just about
out of time here.
One thing you did-- you
continued this journey,
and in fact, you've seen a
lot of my shows in the past.
>>MORRIS: Oh, boy howdy.
>>REGINA: And you really
started following some of the--
>>MORRIS: Well, that's it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: Your show,
Gaia, in general.
But your show in particular, I
picked up, well, three times.
I've watched five
minutes of the interview,
shut it down, gone to
Amazon, ordered the book,
and then gone back
to the interview.
And those were
the emotion codes.
>>REGINA: Yeah, Bradley Nelson.
>>MORRIS: Bradley Nelson.
>>REGINA: And Eileen McKusick.
>>MORRIS: Eileen McKusick.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: She's my main--
>>REGINA: She's wonderful.
I love Eileen.
I just interviewed her
last time I was here.
Two months ago.
>>MORRIS: Oh, well.
I can-- it hasn't
aired yet though.
>>REGINA: No, it
hasn't aired yet.
>>MORRIS: OK.
I can hardly wait.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's wonderful.
Yeah.
She's really good.
>>MORRIS: I had a session
with her son, Cassidy.
He wanted a distance
sonic healing session.
Great kid.
>>REGINA: I don't know her son.
She just told me about
them, but I don't know--
>>MORRIS: She has two sons.
One's named after a Dylan
song and the others named
after a Dead song,
which kind of--
>>REGINA: Because you
like Grateful Dead?
>>MORRIS: Love them.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Well, that's interesting.
So the point is, here
you are, a young guy.
You're in the Vietnam War.
You're doing all
the things guys do.
You're plowing through women,
and they all had to be good
looking or you
weren't interested.
You were the Marlboro man minus,
I don't know, the cigarettes,
I guess.
And that's how you
were living your life.
I mean, in that
sense, we'd say, whoa,
what's he doing here on Gaia?
Right?
You're a totally different
kind of guy's guy,
and this is mostly
female audience.
But the fact was, there
were all these things that
were opening to spirit inside
you throughout your whole life.
You just didn't even recognize
it at the time sometimes.
>>MORRIS: Not until Castaneda.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: And OK.
He was actually teaching
in LA when I lived there,
and I didn't know it.
But his-- I wouldn't have
responded well to his teaching
methods at all because he
used to humiliate people and--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MORRIS: I was done with that
when I got out of high school.
But then I read The Four
Agreements, and I had a--
>>REGINA: Wonderful book.
>>MORRIS: Yes, it is.
And I had a good relationship
with my friend, Judith Moore,
who was an editor at
the San Diego Reader.
And during that
period, there were--
I couldn't sell anything.
I would just send--
I'd write stuff and
send it to my friends.
And Judith bought it, which--
why was she buying
my war stories?
Why was she-- but she did.
And she-- I had decided
I wanted to meet--
I've been looking for a
teacher, a Toltec teacher.
I've been reading, and it
wasn't going to be Castaneda.
So I pitched an interview with
Miguel to the San Diego Reader,
which I did.
It's three chapters of the book.
And so I interviewed Don Miguel.
He took me to Teotihuacan,
that first trip.
I can't even begin.
Well, I can begin because
it's a chapter in the book.
But it would take another hour
to do it, and it was just--
I was in.
I wanted to pursue that
as far as it would go.
>>REGINA: You wanted to
expand your awareness.
You wanted to expand
your consciousness.
>>MORRIS: So I went into
apprentice programs,
and I went to Teo six
times, I went to Peru.
I went to Machu Picchu.
I went to Maui.
I went to--
>>REGINA: You were a
man seeking yourself.
>>MORRIS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MORRIS: And to the
degree that I found myself,
that's where I did it.
>>REGINA: Well, and you did it
at a time and in a generation
that wasn't prone to
doing that, honestly.
That's probably why--
>>MORRIS: Well, it's OK.
When I took the
jump course, which
was a two-year apprenticeship
with HeatherAsh Amara, whom
you have interviewed and her
husband at that time, Raven
Smith.
And I debated about taking--
I'll be 71 when
this course is over.
And I thought, well, I'll
be 71 when it's over,
whether I take it or not.
>>REGINA: Right.
[LAUGHTER]
So and that one, that's
a great line to end on.
That's correct.
And the whole thing, it's
never too late, actually.
It's never too late,
unless your body simply
can't do something anymore.
If it comes to the mind,
spirit never too late.
>>MORRIS: Never too late.
>>REGINA: And
you've proven that,
and you continue to this day.
So I've got to
applaud you for just
making a lifelong journey out of
trying to get to know yourself.
>>MORRIS: Thank you very much.
>>REGINA: And also,
you're a wonderful writer.
Very engaging,
very entertaining.
>>MORRIS: Thank you, again.
[CHUCKLING]
>>REGINA: So again,
the name of Jim's book
is Dreaming Circus, which you
can find on dreamingcircus.com.
Until next time.
Thank you for joining
us here on Open Minds.
[MUSIC PLAYING]